chore(memory): promote strong-fit messaging drafts from memory-pipeline for review (#120)
medic/cht-agent: agent-memory/domains/messaging/issues/10073-fix10068-fix-africas-talking-request-body-parsing.md

---
id: cht-core-10068
category: bug
domain: messaging
domainFit: strong
issueNumber: 10068
issueUrl: https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/10068
title: Fix Africa's Talking SMS gateway double-parsing of the outbound send response body

> lastUpdated: '2026-07-16'

Reviewer: nitpick: ten drafts substantively rewritten in this iteration keep their pre-rework `lastUpdated` (10073, 10477, 10497, 10729, 10868, 10945, 8717, 8774, 9022, 9364), while the five others touched in the same commits were bumped to '2026-07-28'.

summary: The Africa's Talking SMS integration JSON-parsed the response body of its own outbound send request, which `@medic/couch-request` had already parsed, so every send failed to produce a message state change. The fix removes the redundant `parseResponseBody` helper and appends a CI-only e2e case (gated on `AFRICAS_TALKING_SANDBOX_API_KEY`) to the pre-existing Africa's Talking wdio spec, exercising the Sandbox server.
services:
  - api
techStack:
  - javascript
  - nodejs

>   - express

Reviewer: nitpick: the Root Cause now states no Express middleware is involved anywhere in this file, so `express` here keeps the old framing.

```suggestion
```

This fix was backported to the 4.21 release line (PR #10082, cherry-picked from #10073).

## Related Files

- .github/workflows/build.yml
- api/src/services/africas-talking.js
- api/tests/mocha/services/africas-talking.spec.js
- tests/e2e/default/sms/africas-talking.wdio-spec.js
- tests/utils/index.js

## Testing

Updated unit-test fixtures in api/tests/mocha/services/africas-talking.spec.js (the three stringified response fixtures became plain objects; 6 insertions / 6 deletions, no new cases) and added a CI-only e2e case to tests/e2e/default/sms/africas-talking.wdio-spec.js that interacts with the Africa's Talking Sandbox server. The case is a `(CREDENTIAL_PASS_OUTGOING ? describe : describe.skip)` block keyed on `process.env.AFRICAS_TALKING_SANDBOX_API_KEY`, which .github/workflows/build.yml supplies from repository secrets; the tests/utils/index.js edit in the same commit is an incidental `getDoc(id, rev = '', ...)` default and does not support the e2e test. The fix was also confirmed by manual testing.

## Related Issues

> - #10068: Africa's Talking integration tries to parse an already-parsed request body

Reviewer: issue: 'request body' keeps the pre-grounding framing, and the gloss does not match the issue. #10068 is titled 'CHT SMS message sent via Africa's Talking stuck in "pending" state', and the double-parse was of the response body.

```suggestion
- #10068: CHT SMS message sent via Africa's Talking stuck in "pending" state (the service re-parsed the already-parsed response body of its own send request)
```

## Domain Rationale

**Fit:** strong

> Africa's Talking is an SMS gateway CHT uses to send and receive messages, and the bug is in the inbound request-parsing code of that messaging transport service. The build.yml change only wires the new e2e test into CI, so the PR's substance is messaging behavior, not infrastructure or gateway setup/config.

Reviewer: issue (blocking): this contradicts the Root Cause and Code Patterns above, which now state the bug was outbound response parsing and that nothing inbound is involved anywhere in the file. The inbound webhook side lives in `api/src/controllers/africas-talking.js`, which PR #10073 never touched, so this sentence points an agent at a real but wrong file.

```suggestion
Africa's Talking is an SMS gateway CHT uses to send and receive messages, and the bug is in the outbound send path of that messaging transport service: the service double-parsed the response body of its own POST to the gateway. The build.yml change only wires the new e2e test into CI, so the PR's substance is messaging behavior, not infrastructure or gateway setup/config.
```
